A public call for President Jacob Zuma to step down will be debated by Cosatu affiliates at its central executive committee (CEC) meeting later this month, amid warnings by the trade union federation s president that this could severely strain its ties to the ANC-led tripartite alliance.The push for workers to voice their views on the president s future, and who should succeed him, was reinvigorated when the National Health and Allied Workers Union (Nehawu), after its national executive council (NEC) meeting on November 1, called on Zuma to resign and for his deputy, Cyril Ramaphosa, to take his place.The Cosatu CEC meeting is set for November 21 and could have significant implications for the alliance, which Cosatu president S dumo Dlamini said is at its weakest point. If we pull in different directions as the alliance partners, we are weaker and that s why Cosatu would want to contribute towards unity of the ANC in a positive way, he said. We are very careful about our role. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.