BODY LANGUAGE A recent study looking at the effectiveness of a male contraceptive injection was abandoned after the men taking part reported increased incidences of acne (nearly half), mood disorders (more than a fifth) and raised libido (more than a third). There were 320 men in the study and a total of 1 491 adverse events were reported. Those overseeing the trial regarded these side effects as more significant than the fact that the contraceptive injection appeared to work well in reducing the production of sperm. Many women will feel these side effects are minor compared with those of the female contraceptive pill &mdash; and they re right. This raises the question: Why is it so hard to make a male contraceptive? If the plug has been pulled on this one because of side effects, would the female contraceptive pill make it to market if it were released today? On the face of it, regulating fertility in men should be the more obvious choice. Sperm are produced constantly, not in cycles as eggs are in women. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.