It has become necessary to clarify the misconception that the decision of South Africa to withdraw from the International Criminal Court (ICC) is sudden , random and out of the blue , when successive policy documents have outlined the governing party s reasons for pursuing this course of action. The Cabinet s announcement that South Africa has begun the formal process of withdrawal from the Rome Statute is in line with the resolution of the ANC s fourth national general council (NGC) of October 2015 that the government should review our membership of the ICC. It is the culmination of a long and extensive consultative process undertaken by the ruling party with its structures, engagement with the Assembly of Parties (ASP) to the Rome Statute and in seeking a common position from the African Union (AU). As far back as the fourth national policy conference in June 2012, the ANC expressed concern at the actions of the ICC with regard to selective prosecutions and expressed the view that the ICC has vastly strayed from the original purpose for which it was established. As part of the ANC s commitment to participatory democracy and public consultation, the policy documents were released for public comment before the NGC of 2015. Following the decision taken by the NGC, the ANC referred the process of withdrawal to the executive and to Parliament to process in line with their roles and responsibilities as outlined by the Constitution. The separation of powers according to our Constitution has been observed, and the executive has begun the process in line with its obligations under section 231 of the Constitution. The parliamentary process of legislative review that will lead to the repealing of some laws and the amendment of others will follow. The process of withdrawal will take a period of approximately 12 months. The minister of justice and correctional services, advocate Michael Masutha, has written a letter to the speaker of Parliament, Baleka Mbete, notifying Parliament of the Cabinet decision and requesting an opportunity to explain the decision to Parliament. Despite this very clear signal that South Africa intends to follow the necessary legal procedures of withdrawal, last week s announcement was predictably greeted with the usual threats of litigation from the opposition. This is in line with the Democratic Alliance s custom of sacrificing the national interest at the altar of political expediency. In its haste to rush to the courts to challenge any decision taken by the democratically elected government within its constitutional mandate, the DA wants to co-govern this country through the courts. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.