The whistle-blowers of a leaked matric maths examination paper now face having their results blocked by education authorities.The paper was leaked to some schools in Limpopo prior to pupils sitting for the exam on Monday.Professor John Volmink, who chairs the council of Umalusi, the matric exams quality assurance body, said he was deeply disappointed by the leak of the question paper.He said that Umalusi would routinely block the results of a centre or centres implicated in exam irregularities &mdash; and that sometimes results would have to be blocked nationally. We sometimes have to block a district or a province, or even the whole country s results, if it becomes clear that it has spread and that people have had access to the exams. We look at scripts and patterns and if there s any reason to doubt it, we block it. But he said it was too early to say whether the entire country s results for maths paper two would be blocked.Speaking on condition of anonymity, a parent of a child attending Giyani High School in Limpopo said a pupil at the school was the first to receive pictures of the question paper as a WhatsApp message on Sunday. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.