Last week, South Africans learned some shocking news &mdash; their government has notified the United Nations of its intention to leave the International Criminal Court (ICC), the only permanent international institution able to bring those who commit the most heinous crimes, including war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide, to justice.The notice caught many South Africans and other people around the world off guard. It also surprised some high-ranking government officials and even Parliament, which approved the ratification of the Rome Statute in 1998 and signed it in 2002.Simply put, not many people saw this coming.We now know that International Relations and Co-operation Minister Maite Nkoana-Mashabane led the initiative to leave the court in a letter dated October 19.The thought of South Africa leaving the ICC, whose statute bears the marks of South Africa s historical struggles by recognising apartheid as a crime against humanity, has sent shockwaves around the world. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.