The giant multinational company Servest is being investigated for fronting, allegedly pocketing more than R3-million for a contract and the black-owned company with which it partnered received a total of R404 000 &mdash; for doing&nbsp;nothing.It is one of 112 cases the Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment Commission has in its sights.Rovhupfa Garden Services, owned by 50-year-old Michael Mugwagwa, laid a complaint against Servest in July, just after the commission invited submissions.He claimed that Servest, which specialises in hygiene, cleaning, building management and security services, had been using his small company as a front in at least two deals he is aware of.Mugwagwa established his company in 2008, but it remained dormant until a former colleague told him that Servest wanted to give him a contract with Imbumba Aganang Facilities Management, the company that manages the department of international relations and co-operation building in Pretoria.Before Mugwagwa s involvement, Imbumba put out a tender for plant maintenance services for the building, which was awarded to a company called Sonke in 2010. Sonke in turn was bought by Servest, which didn t meet the black economic empowerment requirements to run the contract.Enter Mugwagwa. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.