The Durban high court has ordered a group of high school pupils who were implicated in group cheating in the 2014 matric exams to attend disciplinary proceedings before the end of the year. The pupils from Mashiyamahle Secondary School in Ndwedwe, north of Durban, had steadfastly refused to attend formal hearings, saying they were innocent, and had demanded the release of their matric results. They brought an application against the department of basic education, the KwaZulu-Natal education department and the exams quality assurance body, Umalusi. Meanwhile, the basic education department has allowed pupils from seven schools in the Eastern Cape and 11 schools from KwaZulu-Natal, who were implicated in mass copying in 2014, to sit for the current exams even though they failed to appear for hearings. These pupils do not include those from Mashiyamahle Secondary. According to a report from the department, learners could not be traced, given that they had relocated and school principals were not aware of their whereabouts . There was a huge outcry in 2014 after the department, as well as Umalusi and provincial education departments, identified irregularities following allegations of group copying at 58 schools in the two provinces. The department deployed teams of subject specialists to conduct a detailed investigation into exam scripts in seven selected subjects. Subsequently, candidates matric results at 20 schools in KwaZulu-Natal and 14 in the Eastern Cape were blocked by the department. Invigilators and the implicated pupils were invited to attend formal hearings. Early last year, the department said the individual hearings for each pupil would allow each of them an opportunity to tell their side of the story and to respond to the charge of copying. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.