NEWS ANALYSIS In the wake of the State of Capture report, the difficulty for many people in the ANC will be how to restore the confidence its supporters once had in the party. Although the question of factions and balance of forces will determine who wins the top seat at the party s national elective conference in December 2017, sober minds will look towards 2019, and the general election that takes place that year. This year s municipal elections demonstrated that the people will only put up with so much from the party &ndash; and they ve had to put up with a lot recently. The party needs to counterattack strongly and demonstrate that it has read the shifting politics in the country and will respond suitably. How can the ANC restore this trust? Who has the correct struggle credentials, public service record, broad public support and has become the face of the fight against state capture and for good governance? Who was called on in a time of crisis when President Jacob Zuma tried to appoint a lackey as finance minister, immediately setting off a financially disastrous chain reaction? Yes. Him. For most people, it would be a handicap, but because Pravin Gordhan is not tied to a particular ANC constituency, or faction, it could be a boon if he ran as a fresh-start candidate. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.