The University of Zululand is facing another property scandal, this time over its plan to buy seven blocks of flats for R72.5-million. Unizulu is awaiting approval from the department of higher education to buy 90 two-bedroom, furnished units in Richards Bay to house 350 students. Estate agents said this week the asking price for a two-bedroom flat was between R550&nbsp;000 and R600&nbsp;000 and that the most the university should pay for 90 units, excluding furniture, was R54-million. Eyebrows have also been raised because the selling price of the blocks, known as Bay Sun Lodge, excludes VAT, transfer duty and the estate agent s commission. In a document submitted to Unizulu s council, the university said the flats were furnished and that to buy new furniture and fittings would cost in excess of R10-million . An estate agent said that amount was way off the base because it worked out to more than R111&nbsp;000 a unit, which was ridiculously high for furnishing student accommodation. If I went shopping for furniture for a two-bedroom apartment for students, I could get that for R30&nbsp;000. He said the R72.5-million selling price was a bit higher than what was fair . But the manager of Bay Sun Lodge, Dee Janse van Vuuren, was adamant that the asking price for the property, including the furniture and fittings, was not exorbitant. I believe it s a fair price. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.