Higher Education Minister Blade Nzimande wants the chairperson of the council of the embattled University of Zululand to tell him why he should not appoint an independent assessor to look into the institution s affairs. Nzimande told the chairperson, Cyril Gamede, that an assessment of the report by the vice-chancellor, Professor Xoliswa Mtose, as well as the academic enterprise that is threatened by alleged qualification fraud and changing students marks, and the developments playing out in the labour court and in the media suggests the university is not functioning optimally . In a seven-page letter to Gamede, who is the chief executive of Umgeni Water, Nzimande said that since the academic project is also at risk, he had requested the Council on Higher Education (CHE) to conduct an institutional audit of Unizulu. He expressed concern at a meeting with the council on November 13 last year that the establishment of a multidisciplinary task team meant to provide post administration support to Unizulu had not been set up. The university had been previously placed under administration in 2011. One of the points raised by the administrator is that Unizulu was delicately poised between success and failure. I am concerned that the critical issues identified by the administrator have not been adequately addressed, Nzimande stated in his letter, dated September 2. He said he was particularly concerned about the slow progress on matters that affect the governance, management, student life and the academic enterprise of the institution. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.