Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa looks set to have his presidential ambitions shot down by President Jacob Zuma s backers in government and the ANC after failing to support his boss last weekend. After a motion for Zuma to step down was tabled and defeated at the ANC s national executive committee (NEC) meeting, the embattled president s supporters this week attacked Ramaphosa for not defending Zuma. The motion was put forward by Tourism Minister Derek Hanekom and was supported by several other NEC members, including Health Minister Aaron Motsoaledi, Science and Technology Minister Naledi Pandor, Public Works Minister Thulas Nxesi and Deputy Health Minister Joe Phaahla. They cited former public protector Thuli Madonsela s State of Capture report, which implicated Zuma and his cronies in irregular activity, and the Constitutional Court ruling that found Zuma had failed to uphold the Constitution, as reasons for their motion. Although the NEC ultimately rejected the motion, Zuma s supporters believe that Ramaphosa, as the party s second-most-senior leader, could have prevented the drama, which saw ministers hurling insults at each other. The NEC meeting became so heated that Arts and Culture Minister Nathi Mthethwa and Deputy Agriculture Minister Bheki Cele reportedly almost exchanged blows. The Zuma faction is also unhappy that Ramaphosa did not take the opportunity to distance himself from labour federation Cosatu s call for him to succeed Zuma as the next ANC president. Cyril couldn t defend JZ when all that JZ needed was Cyril, said an ANC leader sympathetic to Zuma. JZ needed Cyril the most and he was nowhere to be found. At least now we know we can t count on him. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.