NEWS ANALYSIS A new cold war has chilled Moscow, where the Russian government is conducting an international counterattack against so-called Western-leaning news agencies and broadcasters such as Reuters, the Associated Press (AP), CNN and the BBC. The strategy appears simple but is effective, and is best described as relaying the opposite news to that projected by the mainstream media. For every AP article or CNN segment about Russian aggression in the Middle East or Africa, Sputnik provides the truth which mostly portrays Russian military interventions as quests for justice and peace, blessed by the affected country. In November 2014, by an executive order from President Vladimir Putin, state news agency Rossiya Segodnya launched Sputnik, a government-owned online and radio international news agency aimed at non-Russian-speaking audiences. Sputnik operates with a budget of 91 million rubles and reports mainly on political and economic news, with regional offices in Washington, Cairo, Beijing and London. The propaganda war was supposed to have ended in 1990 but it was never going to be easy to wish away decades of indoctrination in Russia. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.