Students from the embattled University of Zululand found a creative way of drawing the world’s attention to their plight — by holding a placard demonstration outside a venue where Higher Education Minister Blade Nzimande was attending an international congress. They held a huge poster with the words: “Blade! Why do you ignore corruption at the University of Zululand?” outside the Inkosi Albert Luthuli International Convention Centre in Durban, where Nzimande was attending the World Federation of Trade Unions’ congress. The event was attended by thousands of delegates from around the world. Classes at the university’s KwaDlangezwa campus have been disrupted since August 15 after staff, including academics, belonging to the National Education, Health and Allied Workers’ Union (Nehawu) went on strike over low pay. Nehawu members have been barred from entering the KwaDlangezwa campus since Tuesday after the institution was granted an order by the Labour Court. The university has been embroiled in several controversies including irregularly awarding marks to a candidate despite him failing several modules. Zulu King Goodwill Zwelithini is also “deeply concerned” about the unrest at the institution. The king’s spokesperson, Prince Thulani Zulu, said he was prepared to assist the university at any time. “It’s very difficult to say how far the king can go if the relevant parties are not prepared to come forward. It’s up to those people that need help to come to the king and say how he can help.” Said Zulu: “Apart from being a king, he’s a parent and no parent is not concerned about what is happening.
It’s even worse when the management [of the university] is not coming forward. They are the people who should be coming forward.” A former academic of the university, Professor Musa Xulu, said senior professors and members of the Senate decided last week “to stand up against what is appearing to be gross mismanagement of academic processes by some in the university’s top management”. “There seems to be concerns about a style of management characterised by many staff members as being vindictive, arrogant and abusive and leaning towards corrupt tendencies.” Said Xulu: “The University of Zululand seems to be a lone ranger, unable to solve small local level issues of labour relations, which have been solved by its peers. this may be defined as gross incompetence.” In a statement issued by the convocation’s executive committee, the deputy president, Themba Khumalo, said the “pride, integrity and credibility” of former graduates such as Chief Justice Mogoeng Mogoeng, former Chief Justice Sandile Ngcobo and Nzimande were being threatened by recent reported scandals. “It is unfortunate that, even under the political leadership of our convocant [Nzimande], the ministry of higher education and training has turned a blind eye to the challenges the university has been facing over the years,” he said. “What we normally refer to as historically disadvantaged institutions continue to be the ground for incompetent managers and council members who take advantage of weak systems to benefit themselves at the expense of both the legacy of institutions and services expected by students.” Last week the university confirmed that a local chief paid the vice-chancellor, Professor Xoliswa Mtose, a courtesy visit to discuss the unrest on campus among other things. “It was part of ongoing stakeholder engagement sessions since the university is located in the tribal authority jurisdiction,” said Gcina Nhleko, the university’s director of communications and marketing.