When Finance Minister Pravin Gord han enters the dock as an accused on Wednesday, he will have an impressive array of supporters in the court, outside the building, elsewhere in the city and &mdash; if the organisers of just one group get their way &mdash; throughout the country.Various groups intend to then transform that support into pressure on the government &mdash; and the president in particular &mdash; from business, civil society, political parties, ANC alliance partners and within the ANC itself.The People s Assembly Against State Capture of the Save SA movement has called on employers to allow workers to gather immediately outside their workplaces at 9am on November 2 to rally around the South African flag.In Pretoria, where Gordhan is due to appear on charges including fraud, Save SA and its wide range of civil society endorsers are hoping for a representative sample of South Africa . That group will work with groups from the Democratic Alliance, the Economic Freedom Fighters and other opposition parties, and at least one group in the ruling alliance.In the court itself will be some powerful individuals. I will go to court, ANC secretary general Gwede Mantashe said on Thursday. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.