The storm over nuclear may continue to rage but, until a new Integrated Resource Plan (IRP) replaces the current but outdated one produced in 2010, 9&nbsp;600 megawatts (MW) of nuclear power is officially part of South Africa s energy future. Speaking to the Mail &amp; Guardian this week, the head of electricity regulation at the National Energy Regulator of South Africa (Nersa), Thembani Bukula, said the plan to procure large-scale nuclear power was signed off by the department of energy and Nersa in 2011. In accordance with the Electricity Regulation Act, the minister of energy, with Nersa in agreement, must decide on the amount of additional power required, how it will be generated, to whom it will be sold and who will buy it, and on the establishment of competitive tenders. The minister s responsibility is the stability of electricity supply and Nersa s is to monitor its affordability, Bukula said. South Africa faced a power crisis when the existing IRP was agreed upon in 2010. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.