The Ninevites Founded by: Nkuli Mlangeni When: 2012 What: We design textiles, curate events and keep pushing to tell our stories in ways that reflect their vast beauty and invention. Binding principles: A textile brand that is inspired by black culture, encourages collaboration and is rooted on tradition. Origin of design aesthetic: Black aesthetic Materials used: Sheep wool, mohair and natural dyes Entry level price: R3 500 Produced in: Namibia, Lesotho, South Africa and Peru Number of makers per product: Three to four Stand number at Sanlam&nbsp;Hand&nbsp;Made&nbsp;Contemporary&nbsp;Fair: 52 See more of their work&nbsp;hereJane Sews Founded by: Amy Venter When: 2011 What: Local clothing brand Binding principles: Nature s authenticity.&nbsp; Close attention is paid to fine construction and finish. Jane Sews seeks to create uplifted staples and timeless pieces that are suitable for all seasons. Our focus is on quality and minimal design translated into key pieces that you can build your wardrobe around. Origin of design aesthetic: Durban s nature Materials used: Natural fabrics and genuine leather goods Entry level price: R449 &mdash; R2 199 Produced in: Durban Number of makers per product: About nine on garments and 48 on shoes Stand number at SHMCF:&nbsp; 38 See more of their work&nbsp;here&nbsp;Flaunt Concepts Founded by: Ashleigh&nbsp;Harrington When: 2016 What: Bespoke furniture design Binding principles:&nbsp;Minimalist and nostalgic Origin of design aesthetic: Scandinavian Materials used: Oak wood, powder-coated mild steel, toughened smoke glass and whitened concrete Entry level price:&nbsp;R2 500 &mdash; R18 500 Produced in: Johannesburg Number of makers per&nbsp;product: Four Stand number at SHMCF: 40A See more of their work&nbsp;here Sealand Gear Founded by: Jasper Eales &amp; Mike Schlebach When: 2015 What: Bags and eco-fashion accessories Binding principles: Environmentally responsible&nbsp;decision making, with a rule of placing the environment in the driver s seat, and a focus to design and produce functional, quality product that is built to last a lifetime. Origin of design aesthetic: Form follows function, with a focus on quality rather than quantity. Believers in the slow fashion movement and timeless design. Materials used: Repurposed yacht sails, advertising billboards, truck&nbsp;tarpaulin, Bedouin stretch tents and various other waste materials that were destined for the landfill. Entry level price: R100 &mdash; R2 500 Produced in: Cape Town Number of makers per product:&nbsp;Sealand team/family consists of 26 people Stand number at SHMCF: 42 Find more work&nbsp;here and there&#8217;s&nbsp;free shipping anywhere is SAButter Pudding Founded by: Papama Ramogase When: 2015 What: Kiddies Lifestyle Brand Binding principles: To reassure African children that they are enough and to&nbsp;celebrate their heritage in globally relevant ways. Origin of design aesthetic: Grounded in Africa but globally&nbsp;relevant Materials used: Pure cottons all the way Entry level price: R220 Produced in: South Africa Number of makers per product: Four Stall number at SHMCF:&nbsp; 46 Website&nbsp;here Lulu &amp; Marula Founded by: Jesslynn Schlamm When: 2013 What: A collection of 100% natural skincare, bath and body products Binding principles: Simple is the new awesome. Natural is powerful. Handmade with care is better. The future is local. Origin of design aesthetic: Fun, bold,&nbsp;eternally summer and South African Materials used: Natural oils and raw&nbsp;cosmetics such as clay and shea butter Entry level price: R60 for a lip balm Produced in: Cape Town Number of makers per product: One Stall number at SHMCF: 62 Website&nbsp;here BENA Loungewear Founded by: Xan Fraser and Charlie Moore When: 2015 What: Luxury sleepwear for women, kids and expectant mums Binding principles: To bring classic and elegance back to down-time. Garments are stylish and feminine evoking feelings of pure relaxation and accomplishment. Origin of design aesthetic: Classic&nbsp;European. Materials used: 98% of our garments are natural. This season s collection is made with superior quality cotton and rayons, a natural-based fabric made from the cellulose of wood pulp or cotton. Entry level price: R360 Produced in: South Africa Number of makers per product: Three Stand number at SHMCF: 47 Website: www.bena.co.zaMatter Of Fakt Founded by: Mary-Anne Grobler When: 2013 What: Jewellery Binding principles:&nbsp;Finding perfection in&nbsp;imperfection Origin of design&nbsp;aesthetic: Namib Desert Materials used: Brass,&nbsp;crystals, semiprecious stones Entry level price: R150 Produced in: Cape Town Number of makers per product: One to two Stall number at SHMCF: 45 Website:&nbsp;matteroffakt.comHandmade by Me Founded by: Sera Holland When: 2012 What: Bespoke textile design and handmade interior products and fashion accessories Binding principles: Home furnishings and fashion accessories, thoughtfully made in South Africa, with which to have fun Origin of design aesthetic: I am&nbsp;influenced by art and fashion, the country I live in, and the world around me Materials used: Mostly different 100% cotton or natural fibre fabrics, but we have increased our range to include products that incorporate other materials such&nbsp;as plastic, paper, melamine and cork.&nbsp;Our printing process is ecofriendly and&nbsp;everything is made locally. Entry level price: From R120 Produced in: South Africa Number of makers per product: One or two depending on the product Stall number at SHMCF: 30 Website:&nbsp;handmadebyme.co.zaHam Ethop Founded by: Tsakani Mashaba When: 2015 What: Handbags and shoes Binding principles: Craftsmanship is top of mind when we make our products. We always draw from ancient African techniques of sewing, weaving and embroidery&nbsp;but our designs are&nbsp;contemporary. Origin of design aesthetic: The African continent Materials used: We use natural fabrics such as leather and cotton, beading material and we print our own fabrics on canvas. Produced in: Johannesburg and Cape Town Stand number at SHMCF: 47 Website: instagram.com/hamethopThe Sanlam Handmade Contemporary Fair runs from Friday October 14 to Sunday October 16 at&nbsp;the Hyde Park corner rooftop in Johannesburg. Tickets are R90 at the door or on webtickets.co.za.For more information go to&nbsp;sanlamhmc.co.za