NEWS ANALYSIS &#8220;The concept of global warming was created by and for the Chinese in order to make the US manufacturing noncompetitive. &ndash; Donald Trump, 11:15am, November 6 2012. This tweet, and a whole range of other statements, give a glimpse into how Trump s presidency will deal with the environment. Appealing to a Republican electorate that does not believe the world is getting warmer because of human action, his campaign was littered with promises on what he would do to reverse gains made in tackling carbon emissions. Here s a snapshot of those promises: he has talked about getting rid of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) because it gets in the way of business doing what it wants (this is the agency that ensures the air and water are clean); he has said he will repeal the EPA s Clean Power plan, which seeks to lower carbon emissions from coal-fired power stations; and he wants to stop all government investment in renewable energy. These moves are part of Trump s attempts to make things easier for business, to bring back the industrial jobs that people who voted for him in Middle America have lost. In the Republican worldview, industries that emit pollutants and warm the environment are good for the economy and that means good for job creation. Efforts to lower those emissions and stop global warming &ndash; which is driving droughts and crop failures across the world and seeing Florida (which voted Trump) recede beneath the waves &ndash; are the enemy of these endeavours. That worldview is a problem because the Paris Agreement has just gone into force. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.