The country s 26 vice-chancellors say that the government should provide free higher education to poor students from January.This submission from Universities South Africa (USAf) will be made to President Jacob Zuma s recently established higher education task team.USAf s chief executive, Professor Ahmed Bawa, said the vice-chancellors were proposing that students who receive study loans from the National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS), based on an annual household income of R122 000, should not have to repay the money.Currently, NSFAS beneficiaries are obliged to repay the loan once they graduate and find employment.USAf has also proposed that over the next three years, the annual income threshold of R122 000 for eligibility for a loan should be increased to R200 000 so that more students can qualify for financial assistance. We are by no means out of the woods yet. All of our universities are finding it very difficult to function and there has to be some intervention, because if we enter 2017 with the current situation it would be a disastrous start for next year, Bawa said.Although the University of the Witwatersrand s academic programme proceeded this week, on Tuesday a police van and two buses, including one belonging to the university, were torched. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.