The prosecution of Minister of Finance Pravin Gordhan is ethically dubious, a South African Revenue Service lawyer said in an email exchange that set off an explosive series of events in the past 10 days, including an alleged hostage drama at a Sars office in Pretoria. Four Hawks officials are accused of using physical force and apartheid-style tactics to retrieve a printout of the damning email from a senior Sars employee, Vlok Symington. Among them was Brigadier Nyameka Xaba, the Hawks s lead investigator in the case against Gordhan. Symington was allegedly left with bruises on his forearms and hands from the altercation. Dramatic video and audio recordings suggest that Sars commissioner Tom Moyane might have been consulted and updated during the alleged hostage drama. The recordings were made by Symington and handed over, with other evidence, to the Independent Police Investigative Directorate (Ipid), which is now investigating the matter. The Mail &amp; Guardian was still waiting for comment from all parties at the time of going to press. This bizarre twist in the Gordhan saga was triggered by an email Moyane seemingly erroneously shared last week. The chain of events began with Torie Pretorius, the lead prosecutor targeting Gordhan, emailing Xaba, asking him to obtain a statement from Symington. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.