COMMENT Tax boss Tom Moyane has delivered a deadly blow to the prosecution of his arch-enemy, Minister of Finance Pravin Gordhan. It is a prosecution Moyane himself initiated and one that in the past he promoted both publicly and covertly. The latest revelations are perhaps the clearest indication yet that the case is politically motivated. Many within and outside the governing ANC believe Moyane and Hawks boss Berning Ntlemeza are targeting Gordhan on President Jacob Zuma s instructions, and Zuma will now have to try harder than ever to convince his detractors that he was not behind the agenda to prosecute Gordhan. Although senior ANC and government leaders, including Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa, have condemned the apparent abuse of state resources to target Gordhan, Zuma appears content that the finance minister has a case to answer. This week he told Parliament: This country adheres to the Constitution and the rule of law. No individual is given the right within that to interfere with independent processes and decisions of independent institutions. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.