Last year, Ahmed Mohamed, a 14-year-old from Texas in the United States, was handcuffed, taken into custody, barred from seeing his parents as he was transported to a juvenile detention facility and eventually suspended from school. His crime: bringing a homemade clock to school. It is the same sentiment which resulted in a 10-year-old Muslim boy from Lancashire, England, being quizzed by British police for writing that he lived in a terrorist house &ndash; instead of a terraced house &ndash; during an English class. The overwhelming paranoia that has resulted in children &ndash; their ingenuity and spelling mistakes &ndash; being viewed as potential terrorists is a growing trend in the global framework of Islamophobia &ndash; one which is consuming the mind-sets of many and needs to be urgently addressed. Last week, the Danish government presented a list of measures to combat radicalisation, including steps to assist members of civil society to systematically be present in social media and engage critically in relevant forums, take part in dialogue and challenge extremist views , making it easier to prosecute those spreading extremist views online . Getting the public involved in furthering the attitude that anything involving Islam is linked to terrorism is a slippery slope that every democratic country should avoid. Australia, one of the most peaceful and law-abiding countries, is about to put people who might commit terrorism in prison &ndash; indefinitely. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or&nbsp;consider subscribing. Visit our&nbsp;FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can t I read this article? This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian s content embargo system. It s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work? As a reader, you re able to view content according to the category you fall into:&nbsp; How much does a subscription cost? Go to&nbsp;M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media? Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of&nbsp;publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday&nbsp;and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.